All right, well, welcome along.
Uh, we are live streaming now, I believe. Just one moment.
Okay. That good? And Laura is online.
Hey, Peter. Very good, thank you. Very good. Okay.
Thank you. Hey, killer.
Yeah, she was a moment ago on the, okay.
Well welcome along to the annual review
of the 24 25 financial year
for New Zealand Trade and Enterprise.
We have 45 minutes set down
for this evening's hearing if necessary.
Uh, luck to hand over to you for introductory comments,
and then I'm sure there will be
questions from members. Thank you.
Uh, well thank you very much, chair for, for having us.
And, uh, Damien, can I just say thank you very much
for joining us on Thursday night?
It occurred to me, um, as I was sitting in the airplane
before, we actually should have invited all
of you from the select committee
to attend the International Business Awards
because if you'd heard the stories they were telling about,
um, companies were telling about, uh,
how NZT has helped 'em,
this would've been a very, very short session.
Uh, anyway, Damien was there to witness and thank you.
It's appreciated. Um, so I, I'm, um, delighted
to be speaking behalf of NZTE.
I'm Charles Finney. I've been chair of NZTE since March.
Um, and I've got the Chief executive Peter Crisp on my
right, and I've got Rachel Baxter on my left.
Um, any difficult questions?
I've got lots of support,
but I, I was on the board for 12 years then, then, um, left
for three years and back on.
And so, uh, I'm very proud of NZT.
It's an organization that I've, in terms
of predecessor organizations, uh, worked alongside
for many, many years now.
I've sort of been, um, part of the operation for many years
and it keeps on getting better.
And the story we're gonna tell today is, um, one,
and we have a, um, can someone Collect this?
Got a handout. We've got an Exhibit A, another one.
Um, um, uh, which you can, you can study hard in a second.
Um, but, uh, in, in a rapidly changing global environment,
international trade has never been more important
to New Zealand's prosperity from food
and fiber to tech, manufacturing, tourism
and services exports are the cornerstone
of our economic growth.
With over $108 billion supporting one in four jobs,
uh, growing exports is a key pillar
of New Zealand's economic strategy
under the government's aspiration to double the value
of exports over 10 years.
NZT is supporting businesses to scale
and to grow internationally for the good of New Zealand
to help deliver a more prosperous,
productive New Zealand economy.
But it is really difficult out there.
We have lots of challenges, mainly, um, uh, tariffs
imposed by the United States
and the distortions they're imposing.
And we have a slowing China, so it's not easy
for our exporters.
But we've had a really good year
as NZTE achieving record results
alongside a reduced budget.
And this is why we're just giving you that chart,
which exemplifies that fact.
Uh, NZTE took up this challenge
and focused on increasing productivity
and having impact doing more for less.
NZT has helped businesses deliver deals
that generated a record 4.83 billion in
export value to New Zealand.
A 27% increase over the previous financial year
with a smaller operating budget.
We achieved a record 3,832
International export growth outcomes.
These are things such as new channels to market,
employing people, finding partners.
We supported the delivery
of 17 government led trade missions so far,
this parliamentary term, helping to open doors for hundreds
of business delegates
and delivering over 200 commercial outcomes valued at more
than $2 billion in projected trade value.
And we achieved a positive 78 net promoter score
from the export customers we work with,
demonstrating they find significant value in our support.
On the investment side, we supported 85 investment deals
that resulted in the potential direct economic impact
of 5.4 billion against the target of 5 billion, an increase
of 19% on the previous year.
And the realization of a longstanding internal goal
to achieve 5 billion, um, PDEI.
By 2025, we saw an 11% rise in the number
of investors while the value
of NZ T'S investment pipeline expanded by over 60 billion,
a 334% increase on the previous year.
And we supported the establishment of Invest New Zealand.
In fact, Peter and I were just up in Auckland hearing the
minister, um, give a speech
and announce the new board of, uh, invest,
uh, invest New Zealand.
Uh, so our work has almost been done in that regard.
But we, we supported the establishment of Invest New Zealand
as a new entity, as part of a joint project with mb
with the launch occurring on one July, 2025.
And while we received a reduction in funding
of 3.5 million this financial year from 179.3
to $175.8 million, we also increased
results in all areas
by focusing on core business lifting productivity.
We're working hard to get more for less
with investment in New Zealand now operating
as a separate entity.
And NZ t's return to a single mandate
of supporting the growth of New Zealand exporters.
We continue to deliver on our core strategy,
focusing our support on the thousand most ambitious growth
oriented companies where we have,
we we can have the most impact.
We're focusing with more intensity on emerging high growth
companies and rapidly growing larger high potential firms.
Looking ahead, NZTE is laser focused on supporting the
government's going for growth strategy, working closely
with our partner agencies, MB MPI, tourism education
and others, um, at co being another, uh,
to grow exports while delivering real value
to New Zealand's economy as part
of a crosscutting government approach.
There's no doubt global headwinds are creating challenging
economic conditions for our exporters, leading
to market uncertainty, rising tariffs
and supply chain issues.
Our latest customer survey also showed that scaling
and growing a business and accessing the funding
and resources to grow are impeding our exporters.
There are bright spots too.
The economy grew by 10, export economy grew by 10.
I wish the economy grown by 10%.
The export economy had grown by 10%.
And FFY 25 business confidence
and export expectations are trending upward.
Free trade agreements, um, which are negotiated
by our counterpart agency mfa, uh,
are opening up new, new markets.
Our exporters are finding new high value niches
to explore primary industry exports reached record highs in
2025, and tech and services continue to grow at pace.
Technologically, we're entering a new frontier
where investment in AI
and digital infrastructure will determine our
global competitiveness.
Helping companies navigate these challenges
and leverage these opportunities remain central
to our work for the good of New Zealand.
Thank you. We look forward
to trying to answer your questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much for those comments.
Uh, fisher honorable dam com.
Uh, look, thank you very much and, and congratulations.
Great. Yeah, they should have been there too,
but, um, uh, would've left them involved.
Yeah. Can I just say, um, your point, I'll go straight
to one of the issues you raised, um, to your,
and that is that, uh, a lot
of investment interest in electricity is that interest
because we are coming into a, a market
that is distorted in favor of all those, uh, generators
that is, I heard the minister, um, at EU
Business Summit say, come in, welcome investment into areas
of monopolistic opportunity.
And so do you think that NDT should have a role in,
in encouraging investment into
monopolistic areas of our economy?
Well, um, um, if this is a future focus question,
which I think it is, um, I, I can, um, uh, kick for touch
because we are no longer responsible for this.
This is, um, an invest NZ function now.
Uh, and um, we actually had the minister
and the, uh, new chair, um, presenting on,
uh, on the strategy.
And I think you would find that, um,
there would be interested supporting, um, uh,
energy investment if it is linked to things such
as building new data centers.
So we're talking greenfield's new activity as opposed to,
um, existing activity.
Obviously, huge interest in
geothermal in areas such as that.
So, um, not really our core business anymore. I'm sorry.
No, and I, I, I guess I come back to the enterprise one.
It's, it's one that Pete
and I have discussed on numerous occasions,
and that is that the balance of trade
and inter enterprise, so the one of developing enterprises
and fostering them to grow and,
and export, um, given that g is a core part of that,
that's why I started in a rather blunt way to say,
what are the constraints preventing more development
and growth, real growth
of those enterprises in our economy?
Well, Peter might want to, um, add to this, in fact,
we were just talking about this very issue before,
and it's certainly true that for a number of manufacturing
companies in particular, uh,
the increase in energy prices over the last year
has been a huge constraint.
And if you look at all the statistics where
we are seeing primary sector do very well,
high tech do extremely well.
Uh, the one area that is not growing as fast
as we would like to see, in fact it's
probably contracting, is manufacturing.
But Pete, do you want to
Reflect? Yeah.
Uh, this morning the minister announced target areas
for investing NZ uh, which if they focus on these areas,
will be very good for building, uh, the economy, uh,
for an export as well.
So infrastructure, renewable energy, uh, data processing,
storage and ai
and the development of the tech economy, uh,
advanced manufacturing and processing.
So the more FDI there is into that, uh,
the more you're building up, uh, capacity in New Zealand
and the minister recited, um, some stats just to show
how low our FDI as a percentage of our economy
is compared to the OECD, um, uh, average.
I think the other thing too is that, so
that's on the investment side.
Um, we actually really liked the, the five pillars
that the current government are working to, um, science
and innovation, uh, infrastructure, again, uh, uh,
regulation, um, education and trade and investment.
I mean, they're all about building
the capacity in the economy
because the thing that I've learned in this role is
that there's no one thing
that's gonna build enterprises and help us grow.
But any government trying
to have an economic development strategy's gotta
be touching on a whole number of areas.
And that's, we like those five pillars.
So it's just a reminder that this is an annual review,
backwards looking.
Um, the first couple are free as we warm
Into it, So we do need to have an I appreciate. So,
Because it does come back to the energy one.
And so then directly, how has the closure
of Callahan affected the potential for us to grow?
Um, you might have to say something about this as well.
So, um, look, a, a lot of the funding
that Callahan was dispersing has gone to mb, uh,
which is very helpful.
So, and of course the RD tax credits are still there.
Uh, and I think it's probably too early to say, um,
what the impact of not having Callahan there.
Uh, if there is to be an impact, it'll be at the sort
of seeding, uh, startup part of the ecosystem.
But so far it's very, very early days, so it's very hard
to say what, what the impact will be
The supplementary. And
there are other people sort
of stepping into the vacuum as well.
Supplementary, Dr. Lawrence, you know,
Um, thank you Chair.
Just on the part you mentioned, both in terms of energy
and electricity, but also in terms of manufacturing.
I wanna check, so we've known since 2023
that EU is gonna introduce CAM.
And this is a question for both nzt.
'cause I know that N Zts got some information on this
as well as mfa,
but what has NZT been doing this last year in preparation
for people going into the full implementation
of CCAM on the 1st of January, 2026?
And how have you been working with, for example,
industries that are affected?
What exporting into EU on having to deal
with and manage that?
Um, uh, we look very carefully at
what, uh, the individual requirements are of the companies
that are exporting, particularly the thousand that we're,
that we double down on, that we commit 80% of our effort
to 1000 companies.
A big chunk of those are going to Europe.
And a big chunk of those are very, uh, sensitive
to the su sustainability settings in Europe.
Yeah. So we, uh,
build up capability in New Zealand for companies.
So we run, we've got people employed
that advise companies on sustainability settings, uh,
internationally, particularly in Europe.
And we've got practices and,
and specialist advisors in Europe
who are advising the New Zealand companies on, uh,
sustainability credentials, uh, in, in Europe.
Have you heard much like concerns from those exporters in
general about the settings or
because of the settings, everything you've been doing,
people are pretty comfortable,
even though there might be adjustments that needs
to be made, sign the case to be board, et cetera.
Like what, what are people saying?
Uh, I think, um, yeah,
strong sustainability settings in Europe are both
a threat and an opportunity.
Yeah. Um, there's no doubt if you want to, yeah,
particularly on food and beverage
or manufacturing, if you want
to climb into the European market, you have
to chin the bar particularly into those
big supply chains like the Tescos
or the wait shows, things like that.
So there's no, no doubt about it.
But also, um,
'cause it's such a, a high bar
of chin coming from New Zealand, uh,
you've got a good country story behind you
and you've got some good sustainability
settings behind you as well.
So, so, uh, that's what, that's the threat
and that's the opportunity. Uh,
And I think New Zealand exporters obviously taking
advantage of the opportunity.
We've got the free trade agreement recently negotiated,
but over the last year, um,
we've got 34.3% increase in exports to the eu.
It's only gonna become a more important market for us.
And exporters are very aware of the need
to be seen to be sustainable.
That's good to know. I think we said, I think, um,
a o New Zealand published a report that 70%
of the goods exporters are exporting to countries
with the requirement for, uh, carbon credentials
or climate credentials to be stated.
Uh, so that we know that's there.
It's quite a big, uh, you know,
requirement around the world.
It has evened down a little bit, I think, yeah,
that whole requirement for sustainability is proven
that it's not a one single linear trend.
It is cycling a bit, particularly
as we had a high inflation period post COVID.
It definitely dampened down some of the sustainability, uh,
signals, but I think over time
those signals are still there.
Dana Kirkpatrick. Thank
You, Mr. Chair. Um,
uh, thank you, um, for your time today.
Um, look, uh, my question is just about the government's,
uh, target to double the value of exports, um, in,
in 10 years time.
Um, and I'm just interested in your view on, on
how we're tracking, how we're going.
I mean, I look at this, this is the positive.
Um, but, uh, do you, do you think that, if that's possible,
how, what are your views on where that's going?
How we perform in a, in a previous chair role,
we were given an even more ambitious target,
and we delivered on it in five
years earlier than the target.
So it can be done if you, um, develop the right strategies.
Obviously NZTE is not solely responsible
or being held fully accountable
for delivering, um, on that goal.
But it is, uh, sort of one of, uh, uh, beacons on the hill.
We have a, at every board meeting a, uh, a three piece
of paper with, um, uh, key indicators.
And we have the government's goal of doubling exports as one
of those indicators we look at, at every board meeting.
And I'm very pleased to report that we're on track.
Good, but it's only two years in. But, but we're on track.
I, I'm personally confident that we can achieve that.
We're not gonna be able to achieve that just on volume.
We're gonna have to increase the value of some
of our exports as well.
Correct. And that, that,
and luckily that's an area where actually a lot
of the growth is occurring in high
tech and services. Mm-hmm.
Which is a great segue into my next, uh, question on
that topic, which is, um, where do you see the opportunities
for us as a country to double that value?
Because as you rightly say,
we can't just keep progressing volume.
Um, the value is the key word.
Um, well, I, I see opportunity all over,
which is why she'd been at the business awards.
You'd come away inspired.
One of the best things we do as a board and, and,
and working with the team is going to visit these companies.
And you come away hearing their stories and their plans.
And it's very, very common to, uh, to visit companies
that actually have that doubling as part
of their strategy or even more.
We, we visited one company at the most recent board meeting
in the Bail Plenty, which, which, um,
currently exporting about 75, uh, million dollars a year.
They're, they're on track to go to 150 million, and that's
before the 2034 target.
So we, this, you know, I, I've got no doubt
that we can do it at a, at a certain level,
but we are going to have to, uh, continue to, uh,
support particularly the high tech, um, and
and services economy if we're gonna
get to that, that target.
And there's enormous opportunity in that space.
Low hanging fruit obviously is in the tourism
and education space
where we haven't fully recovered from COVID,
but the, the, the, um, the work that is going on, the,
the incredible product that's being developed in, in those,
um, uh, those two sectors, um, fills me
with Hope. Chief Executive.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, I mean,
the tech is probably the biggest change
since I've been in my role.
It's quite some time. Um, is the growth in the size
of the tech, uh, sector.
Um, you know, so Holger share zero, um,
just say nothing efficient.
Public healthcare be around for a long time.
That company reports a company growing Datacom, uh,
mainframe, a services company, uh, you know,
all pretty good growth stories outside of, of strict goods.
Um, it's weightless, highly dependent though on the smarts
and the economy, all sorts of other setting.
That's why I like those five
pillars of the government strategy.
'cause this, you don't grow
export economy just by focusing on markets.
You gotta build the capacity back here in New Zealand.
So tech sector has clearly got a lot of, a lot going for it.
Um, and the food, it's really, it's the path
to value the added value.
We've got lots of get the business awards we saw,
I don't know, picks peanut butter, um, you know, fix
and file peanut butter, craft beer,
got good healthy wine just letting go for a while.
So all that value add food
and beverage, uh, to compliment some of our bigger,
our bigger trades and, and meat, um, and dairy.
Uh, yeah, Kiwi fruit's a great story.
Uh, they're just going from strength to strength.
So all across food and bread beverages quite a bit.
The one I worry about the most is the manufacturing.
Um, but there's still lots
of good manufacturing companies like
the Hamilton Jets of the world.
Um, but yeah, I, I'm old fashioned enough to think
that I think, you know,
any economic development strategy needs a focus on
manufacturing at the heart of it.
Um, and that's the, you know,
if you look at the export stats, so those are the ones
that struggled in COVID
and they've struggled a little bit, uh, at the moment.
So it's the manufacturing one.
We should be opportunity, but needs a lot of focus.
Okay. And just one more last one, if it's okay.
Um, and so in terms of, uh, to, to make the gains
that we need to make and to support the industries
and the sectors that you talk about, what is the, um,
operating environment, uh,
is there an operating environment
change that we need to make as a country?
Uh, is it regulatory? Is it, um, innovation? Is it r and d?
What, what is the, what is the change
that you think will drive the greatest, um, I guess result?
Well, it's multifaceted as, as Pete Peter says, you know,
the government's got a buy five pillar strategy,
but we're not going to be able to get there
unless we have the infrastructure, uh, that we need
to support, um, the expansion and trade.
And we're not gonna get there
unless we have, uh, the education sector delivering those
who are going to be working in a, in our companies.
Uh, and it's not going to, uh,
and they have to have technological skills, uh, as well.
And r and D's gonna be critical.
The manufacturing company that I've talked about
before, which is about double.
They leave their, their value is as much a high tech, um,
automation company now as it was
just a manufacturing company.
They've invested a huge amount, um,
and the value of what they're producing as a result is going
to be considerably more so.
So it's multifaceted.
I'm confident we can get there,
but we have to make sure that the overall infrastructure
and environment is, is, uh,
is in place to support that growth.
Next Question. Honor what Dam O'Connor,
Uh, look, thank you. And,
and Pete, you spoke
and referred to a number of food companies
and other companies direct into
market offering additional value.
Um, we've just seen the sell off ORs in the process
of selling the consumer side
of our single biggest company offshore, uh, $4 billion.
So there's a couple of questions.
Is that $4 billion part of the pipeline that you refer
to here of the investment?
And the second thing is, how do you think it's possible
for those smaller companies to compete
and succeed in the international marketplace
where now single biggest company has basically given up in
that area of adding value, um, into the consumer market?
I'll let you feel that one.
Um, I don't particularly, uh, want
to comment on the investment decisions
and commercial decisions about any one particular company,
uh, to any great extent.
Uh, but I think there's one thing to be understood about
that play as I understand it, is, um, the three parts.
They got commodities, business and ingredients business,
and they have the consumer brands,
the ingredients business is a value add business.
You know, if you go up into China
and you look at Fonterras application centers,
they've got 500 people employed up there
that are doing customized ingredients for uses by chefs,
pastry kitchens, all this sort of stuff.
So it's not, that's a value add play.
They just simply saying, look, they've got to, uh,
double down on their investment
and part of their value add operation,
which was ingredients, uh,
because they don't think they were there.
I think they said they were, oh, they're not the best
owner of consumer brands.
Like they're all their commercial decisions.
And I'm not gonna comment on anyone company's commercial
decisions, but at least I could understand
it when they explained it.
Can I, can I just Mm. Can I challenge that a little bit?
Because, you know, you are tasked, you've got taxpayer money
with an objective of doubling the value.
Yeah. Uh, and you say you won't make comment on those
decisions, but you are working directly with companies
to encourage them to make the right decisions.
And yet when they make those, you don't make a comment now
that this is taxpayer's investment
and isn't there an obligation for us as a select committee
to ensure that that's, you know,
being used in the right way.
'cause actually by an international measure, our exports
as a percentage of GDP is very low,
or at the low end of the spectrum.
So shifting that will require some change.
And I think it's, to be fair to the, the question
before, what are the settings?
'cause we are just, we are told just bringing more
investment into the country will help drive that.
You say there are five pillars, I accept that.
Um, but a lot of the stuff we get from government is
that bring the foreign direct investment
and we will grow our export economy.
I, I, I realize it's complex,
but, um, you know, there should be some response.
Well,
I'll give you a, a counterfactual.
Uh, so on, um, Monday, I think
maybe last week, it's all blurring.
Uh, I was, uh, at a function with the, um, governor
of Shong Province,
and we were celebrating a $260 million investment in a pet
food factory, which is utilizing a closed dairy
factory in South Auckland.
Or, or, or maybe North Wata.
Not quite sure where the boundary lies.
Um, and, um, you know, that, that, that is certainly a, um,
a project NZT has been heavily involved in and supporting.
Um, and it, and it, I think, um,
is definitely gonna be adding value to our economy
and shows how smart foreign investment can be.
In the case of, uh, the Fonterra sale, uh, I would comment
that they haven't sold their complete brand business.
I think that in certain markets such as China,
they're still, still, um, in that, in that space.
Um, and, um, uh, it's their decision.
I'm not, were we involved in any way in No,
I don't think we were involved in any way.
Fonterra is, uh, a company that we will work
with in many places around the world,
but it's not one of our focus 1000 companies.
It's, it's too big. They can do everything we could
do in terms of support.
Mr. Chairman, can I just follow
on, 'cause you make a valid point.
I don't think anyone would deny the value of,
of Greenfield's investment
and a whole new proposition at nui,
but it's the one of actually just taking over,
not necessarily guaranteeing any added value
to an existing asset.
And so do you think the
decisions should be, uh, differentiated between greenfields
and between, just to say, a transfer of ownership
when it comes to investment?
Okay. Um, through the chair. I mean, I think, uh, okay.
Yeah, you go, yeah. Um,
just talking backwards because we are now entering
Yeah, I appreciate that. But
looking backwards, um, uh,
when NZT was running investment, uh,
our calculation was based on a DEI calculation,
which is direct economic impact.
So it was a calculation effectively of the number of jobs
that were created, both direct, uh,
indirect additional taxation, the additional ebitda.
So you might have a very, very big sale of a company
with no additional value with zero PDI zero DEI.
Or you might have a company that, uh, a foreign
that buys a company, but then invests a lot in it.
Uh, and you get a big uplift to the PDI.
So the calculation was designed to cater for exactly
what you're saying, which is
to calculate the economic uplift, uh, for the country.
But I think, you know, just to go back to the five pillars,
I think, and go back to, um, Dana's sort of question, is
that, um,
and to be honest, every government that I've been working
with on both sides
of the house have had all had a multifaceted economic
development strategy with science and innovation,
and with education in it, with infrastructure, in it,
with trade, in it, with investment.
There's been differences around the edges,
but everyone I think has known for a long time
that there's no silver bullet.
Uh, you gotta pull on all these levers in a co certain way
at the same time, that's the only way to get it.
And that's all the experience from the, uh, small,
vast economies internationally
as they run coherent strategies
where they're pulling on these leaders at the same time.
Next Question. Dr.
Uh, thank you Chair.
Just wanna first pick up on something you said in terms
of you could have a high cell value,
but the, what you are looking for is the DEI.
Can I check? So in your report, for example, on page eight,
you talk about, um, the fact
that the export goods service earning, et cetera, year
to March, 2025 is 46 billion.
And then later on you're talking about, and,
and I could have that,
that those two numbers may not cooperate at
All. But then for
example, on page 12, you are saying that the,
the PDI investment value, the ones
that ended either hand in is 5.4 billion when you have
for, so $46 billion as export goods and BI is 5.4 billion.
Is that, it may not actually work that way,
but is that the right proportion?
Uh, just to explain the, um,
there's two triangles on page seven,
and thank you for reading the, uh, annual report
because a lot of time, and if it goes into next things, I,
I don't mind look at that.
Highlight highlights
A best Salad. You
should, and go through
and just highlight it so you can hold it up. Um,
See that's where it says about the one.
Yeah. Very good. Um, anybody's read,
page seven is the International Revenue of Companies, uh,
just accumulated, uh, the graph on,
which is the same one we've handed out.
Yeah. Uh, the, the graph on the investment PDI is, um,
the underlying investment value, uh, multiplied
by the value of that investment.
So that's the, okay. The impact of that investment.
So for example, you're running a value of two to one, uh,
then 5.4 would be, um, you know, two
and a half billion dollars worth of underlying deals
to generate $5.4 billion worth of, uh, value.
Yeah. Uh, so it's a, a different part of the equation.
So that's not, um, that those aren't,
isn't the actual ratio,
but that just gives you an i, uh, idea of how it works.
And just one final question, chair, and,
and this is sort of related.
Um, one of the things obviously that has been giving,
and you mentioned wine before, uh, giving a lot of, um,
uncertainty to the export sector is the US tariffs.
Um, I wanna check what's entity's role in this?
Um, and especially how you are working
with the export sector, those
who are affected in navigating the change in systems
with the tariffs, particularly since some of
how tariff manifests itself in the US
and both from, uh,
import into us, but also a supply chain issue.
Yeah.
Okay. So, um, I think we might well have a go at answering
that question at a, at a headline level.
Obviously the, the, um, response, uh,
in terms of policy is not our responsibility.
That's an and ministerial Yeah. Responsibility.
But we are doing everything we can to,
to support New Zealand companies navigate these
increasingly choppy waters.
Would you like to just talk about the tariff,
The support, Rachel, go? I think
There's a, a few things we're doing,
one we've been running a lot of webinars with,
and I think we've had the highest turnout
to those webinars than worried webinars.
Um, we've run, so that's just general kind of information.
We've also brought in a one-to-one service.
We, we can be working directly with a company, um,
exactly like you're saying, thinking about supply chain,
thinking about scenario planning.
Um, and then there's been a, you know, bunch
of things we've been doing in terms of
Moment committee, happy to give leave
for the ceo, you'll end up
At his blog. I warn
you. We've done that.
I think we've done that carry. Yep. And
A bunch of kind of digital content and so on.
And, um, mine, ZT platform as well.
So it's been a combination of one to some, one to many,
and then one-to-one work with
Customers. And what's
the response, I guess, and satisfaction?
Yeah, in terms of the quality of advice that's
Been presented. Um, so
satisfaction's been really good.
Um, I think companies are hungry
for context and information.
We are certainly not seeing companies make any big, um,
changes at the moment in terms of moving supply chains
or anything because it's just been such an
uncertain environment.
So companies have been, um, typically, you know,
staying still, but really kind of planning what's plan A,
what's plan B, uh, what's plan C.
So can I just give you a, a case study which we,
we met with recently.
And so it's a company, the same company actually that,
that $75 million turnover,
it's got a manufacturing operation in the states,
one in the UK and one in New Zealand.
They thought that they would be pretty much immune from the
tariffs because of the fact they're manufacturing the
United States, but they have discovered, um,
they're getting a double whammy.
So every input that they are having to import
is obviously more expensive with, with, um, the tariffs.
Some of what they're using is, um, a steel product,
so it's not just a 15% uplift, it's a 50% or 45% uplift.
Um, and all the prices
of US inputs have gone up as well.
So, uh, in terms of tariffs, they're finding
that they've got a $2 million extra tariff bill in
that since the tariffs were introduced.
And they've also got the uncertainty of, um,
every import uh,
shipment is getting a different interpretation at the port.
And so they've had to employ a staff member who does nothing
but dealing with the customer's administration.
So you've got the $2 million plus you've got,
got the cost of that staff member.
So that, I think that's a reasonably typical, uh, story.
We're trying to ease, uh, that burden
with technical advisory service
that we are, we are providing.
And, um, um, all the anecdote I have
received, it's very, very positive.
It is a mixed bag too, in terms of, um,
some companies have been able
to pass the tariff right through.
Some are splitting it.
Um, some haven't been able to, obviously
where the dollars at, at the moment has helped take a little
bit of the sting out of it.
And also there were a bunch of companies that sent all
of product, um, up to market in advance.
So you're starting to see those, um, stocks deplete,
and then some of the tariff impact will flow through
It. It somewhat
contradicts the prime minister's view
that we should be comfortable with The 10% tariff regime.
I, I think it's 15% or New Zealand.
Uh, uh, and, and, and,
and don't forget it, um, is, um, uh, 15% on top
of the, um, existing tariff rates and,
and some dairy product areas, as you'll know very well.
That's, that's quite, quite,
I guess my point is quite enormous.
We should, none of us should be comfortable with any
of these tariffs be a fair assumption. You think?
Well, it's very bad economics. Yeah.
Uh, and it's gonna distort, um, um, uh,
global trade patterns and due course,
and it's going to, um, in my personal view, have a,
a impact on the United States economy that, that,
that will be, uh, the negative for global growth.
But, but, um, I, so far,
I think New Zealand exporters have been extremely,
um, nimble.
Um, and, um, um, we we're certainly surviving in the market
and, and, and, and some companies are expanding.
In some cases there's variable impact.
Others are fitting the, the pain.
And, uh, and can I just add in, uh, just our appreciation
for the military foreign affairs and trade
because, um, as Rachel said, uh,
we've been organizing these, these, um, tariff webinars
with record attendance, so people of like, uh,
van Galles are incredibly high demand,
these traveling all over the world, like a crazy man,
but he's still turning up and pitching up.
Mm-hmm. And the exporters have really appreciated the
breadth of understanding.
So it's a good teamed up effort with MFA MPI, us, a range
of other agencies just to try and stay ahead of it.
So that's just a one. Thank you.
The other comment is that you've got the direct impact
of the tariffs, and that's, you know, mixed is being said.
Um, then you've got the indirect impact
and it's the chilling effect that, that
probably has been the most announced.
The chilling effect on our growth story here.
The chilling effect on investment decisions
go to market decisions.
So, um, that's the bit
that we're working very, very carefully.
It's uncertainty. That's, that's, yeah,
that's really, really hitting
Everyone hates uncertainty.
Look, thank you very much. Um, I, I just have two issues.
One is that the, one of the, um, investor migrant category,
and, and we developed that in 2022.
Um, but since that time,
and I, you know, it was wasn't, uh, unanimous and the,
and the levels and the criteria anyway,
we've only had $170 million come in, um,
which is peanuts really from 248.
Do you think we should change the settings on
that investor migrant program? This
Is the A IP.
Yes. Um, the figures that we were given this afternoon,
um, were that, um, it's um, I think close to 400 million
that's actually been invested just a big
Jump from one 70.
Yeah, yeah. It's very dynamic.
And the pipeline's, I think up to 2.8 billion.
Uh, so, so the interest in this is really strong.
Um, but this is a, um, uh, unfortunately
for today's discussion, an issue that is very much, um,
invest n nz responsibility.
It was a big policy change in may that from
that point in time, it accelerated dramatically.
And that's where it is at the moment.
It's a good policy policy expect results.
Can I thank you
and look, I, I, um, you've done this
for the second year in a row, and I did warn you last year,
but, um, it said NZ reported
that 20 24, 25 was its most successful year,
and that it had achieved more with less funding.
So I guess the question for any incoming government to say,
if we give you less, will you do better?
My, my strong message
to the CEO is we can always do better.
So with less that, that, I mean, I think the
Minister, well, I think, think
Minister, well Please, there will,
there will come a point where it'll be impossible
to maintain the services necessary to deliver the results.
But, um, uh,
I think the team has done a spectacularly good job over the
last year, um, uh, adapting to the reduced funding and,
and continuing to deliver absolutely fantastic results
for the New Zealand export community.
Yes. Presumably by focusing on core business. Yeah.
Well, I think that, thank you, uh, for that.
And I'm, and thank you for the question.
I, uh, that, that's the downside of handing that out, right?
But I get a strongly held belief at the board
and the executive team that, um, yeah,
we're a low productivity country, uh,
and the drive for increasing productivity has got, has
to be fervently held
in both the public sector and the private sector.
So I think as a public sector person, I believe
that it's my role, our role as a board
and executive team to get, uh, more results from less.
And the key mechanism is to focus on the core, uh,
as you said chair.
Uh, and now there's, there's consequences for that.
So some of the things were cut off, um, are things
that were good things to do, like sponsorships that we do,
way less sponsorship than we used to do better by
Design, Better by design some
of the big eventing that we used to do.
Um, but yeah, so there's a, there's a, there'll be a limit.
Uh, what I really don't wanna do is be pushed off
that thousand companies.
So, so that's the thing we're watching,
but we're really sort of packed ourselves down to be
as tight as we possibly can and to lift our productivity.
The next big productivity lift will come from ai.
So as an organization along with the guidance from the, uh,
ministerial and the, um, public service, uh, leadership is
to lean into artificial intelligence to see
what additional productivity gains can be achieved.
So we are up for that. So that's really, I think,
a good philosophy in the public sector at the moment.
Um, and, and so is every other country around the world.
So, yeah. And I guess the question is, you know,
how do we improve our competitive, um, edge on that?
And, and so I guess I've lost the original question
that I was gonna ask you unfortunately,
but, um, um, no, sorry.
Um, I'll come back to it, which apologies, Mr. Chairman.
It's all right. It's gonna be about a great,
great doubling of exports.
Can I, now the question was, you're in, and,
and I, I shouldn't ask Charles
'cause he'd be far too diplomatic,
but, um, there, there's great debate.
Well, there's some discussion more recently
around public sector versus private sector.
In fact, most of the decision, the decisions
around productivity on the enhance private sector.
And so the question is why do we think
that we haven't made more progress?
And we continue to have a low productivity economy when
by international standards, we are one
of the easiest countries in the world to do business in.
And we have one of the lowest levels
of direct intervention from any government.
Uh, you, you've, you've, um, I think by mistake, um,
stumbled into one of my favorite subjects, so I'll try
and try and take the answer.
No mistake. But, um, it's extremely complex, obviously.
And I think part of it is, uh, um, uh, we,
we keep on talking about it.
New Zealand is a small country. We're not by land area.
We're same size as Japan, uk, uh, we're,
we're a large con country,
but we've got an incredibly unfriendly topography.
So we can't just have one port like Singapore has,
or one airport like Singapore has to cover our,
our land area and our topography.
We need, need multiple, so that,
that's working against us right from the start.
Uh, and I think the, uh, type of, um, products
that predominate in, uh, export mix, um, are
more difficult to grow the productivity on, um,
that then, then, um,
then some other jurisdictions are able to achieve.
But we have to focus on productivity, um,
because we have to remain competitive.
Uh, we have to try and get better return for our exports,
and it's through productivity growth
that we're gonna see higher wages.
So all, all of this is in that absolute critical focus.
Thank you. Yeah. Look, look, and, and,
and I guess, um, you, you referred to the Better by design,
the fact that that couldn't continue, maybe
that's the most important thing that,
that you could have overseen for the next 30 years
of, of more productivity.
I, I guess the question of short versus long term
and where do you see NZ T's role in that?
Uh, well, I mean, I think fortunately, uh, we
are in the mission
of the organization's quite a long term play.
Um, as Minister Willis said at the Intentional Business
Awards, acknowledging your presence, uh, Damian,
that the trade effort, both negotiation of trade agreements
and export support has actually been one
of the bipartisan initiatives over a long period of time.
So, so sure the strategy's gonna change a little bit
with each, each government,
but, you know, being in the organization,
multiple governments, it's been really, really essential
to have that bipartisan support, uh, over time.
So I think it is a long term play. Very
Good. Alright, we're
over our time, so thank you very much
for coming in this evening.
Appreciate your insights
and update on NZ T'S performance over the last year.
Very much. Thank you very much.
Have A good thank.